Me seeing your faces and we will miss on some of the exercises and activities just are like doing in class so it will be like very brief and impersonal unfortunately introduction to linguistics and while linguistics is important to cognitive systems. First of all something that I'm sure you already know what these linguistics linguistics is the scientific study of language and what we know about languages well first of all there are still a lot of them so we have something like 7, 000 languages still spoken in the world unfortunately we are living through some theoretical linguistic extinction event every two weeks a language dies by the end of the century half of the known spoken languages will die unfortunately but right now we still have this tremendous linguistic diversity and we are working very hard to document as much as we can in addition to spoken languages we also have about 140 known sign languages this number is under a presentation we estimate that at least twice as many sign languages exist that we haven't discovered yet and there are even tactile languages of the deaf blind community that we do some research on this day so there are plenty of linguistic diversity linguists are very busy and on this note I just want to go ahead and say right away there is no language that is better than another language all structures of all languages are complex diverse and capable all fulfilling all of the communicative needs of their speakers or signers and because of that in language. Are complex, diverse and capable or fulfilling all of the communicative needs of their speakers or signers. And because of that in linguistics we adopt what we call descriptive approach. We annotate and document how people actually communicate linguistically rather than telling people how they should be communicating linguistically. For example if your English teacher ever told you this is incorrect you shouldn't say this you should say that instead while linguists never do that. Because from a linguistics standpoint any dialect and any language has logical grammar and just because grammar of one dialect is different from grammar of what is considered to be stuck on earth or correct way it doesn't mean it actually any worse. Usually those are just different tools and what gets to be standard in a language usually is just a historical accident. In linguistics we never take the prescriptive approach, never tell you how to speak or sign or whatever we take the descriptive approach of studying how you speak or sign and so on. And selling which is this is not a commonly known fact so when to emphasize it selling which is a real languages. They have all the same grammatical roles as spoken languages or the same level of organization. They have syntax, they have morphology, they have phonology. We are not you know trying to be like overly politically correct to anything when we say selling which selling which is it's a scientific truth that selling which is a real languages just like English or German or Hungarian. Linguistics is a massive field that multi-ball subfields within linguistics but here are the the six most basic ones that is. Or wintering. Linguistics is a massive field. They're multiple subfields within linguistics. But here are the six most basic ones that if you ever start at the green linguistics or a minor maybe you will be educated in all six of those. What are these basic fields of linguistics? Phonetics is the study of how we produce sounds, the articulation of sounds or parameters in selling, which are things like hand shapes and moments and stuff. Phonology is a more abstract way of how we conceptualize of these movements or sounds in circle languages. Those are already more but how you represent the sounds in your mind. And what kind of rules you have in your mental lexicon, mental grammar. Morphology is the study of how words or signs can be formed. I will give you some examples of that later. Syntax is probably something that all of you are the most familiar with. This is how sentences are formed, right? Where you should put work, where you should put object and so on. Syntax is how meaning is derived from words or signs or sentences. And pragmatics is how context affect the means. The same word can mean different things in different contexts, right? Those are six most basic, most important fields in linguistics that every linguist is trained in and can do some research in. But in addition to that, they're multiple other subfields in linguistics. For example, in the 20th century when we started to create scientific tools that can help us can brains, for instance, they feel so neural linguistics and psycholinguistics came about. But you really study how language is stored and represented in the brain. I'll use it very, start like Fameraimi. They feel so neural linguistics and psycholinguistics came about, but you really study how language is stored and represented in the brain. I use studies like fMRI machines so I track in machines and so on and so forth. It's a linguistics is how language is used in society. For example how different groups of people use language differently and so on. And there is a study of relationship between language and culture. A study of historical linguistics or how languages change in the throughout history. Computational linguistics is a very hot topic right now. We even started offering computational linguistics master's in our department recently. This is basically how computers can process and utilize human language. And in addition to the multiple other fields that it depends on where you are, whether you have access to them, but you know that feels like forensic linguistics or the use of linguistics and forensic science. There are things like comparative linguistics, language acquisition, language evolution, language rehabilitation, clinical linguistics. There are plenty, plenty, plenty of linguistics, subfields that if you ever go into linguistics, they will be like more advanced studies. After you learn all the basic ones. While linguistics is important, well the study of linguistics offers us the window into the human mind or how language knowledge is organized and structured to human minds in society or how language guides and helps us been guided in our culture and in our societies. And of course human behavior, language as a social performance, right? The way we speak, the way we move our bodies and so on things like this. And as such linguistics. And of course human behavior, language as a social performance, the way we speak, the way we move our bodies and so on, things like this. And as such, linguistics is very important to cognitive science, right? And cognitive systems, why? Because cognitive science is trying to come up with a unified theory of the human mind, right? Developing a theory that will account for all mental abilities. We have all kinds of mental abilities as human beings. We can perceive, we can think, we can remember, we can learn and in many of these abilities, language plays a very important role, like learning, obviously involves some language. And of course, in the state and language is also a crucial mental ability as well. And visiting the domains of cognitive science, language is started, not just by language, but basically by every self-filled of cognitive science. Here, I want to give you an example of just one word of that and how that is started by all self-fields in cognitive science. Let's start with the most obvious one. Linguistics is a self-filled in cognitive science. How do you link this study to that? First of all, there is the known fact and I think it's an intuitive fact as well. There is the most frequent word in the English language, right? This way into it, because we use there there's a lot of nouns, preguelous of the meaning. It's a very frequent word. Here I have a study by Kucha. It's a corpus of one million words. They basically found that every 14th word in that corpus was that. It's a very frequent word, the most frequent word in the English language. It's a corpus of 1 million words. What can we say about it as a language? Again, I just showed you the language that has always different subfield that I used, but so and each one of them has something to say about that, but I will only give you three examples here. First of all, articulation of an 8-6. The word there is produced differently depending on what noun it is used with. Here I have two examples, the problem and the answer. I challenge you to say to yourself, if you are an English speaker and if you're not asked a friend who is an age of English speaker, you go here, you're producing the word there differently, depending on whether the following word starts with a consonant or with a vowel, right? Or is it a consonant? It's more like that. And with a vowel, it's more like the answer, right? We produce this for differently, depends on the context on what word follows it. And phonology, which is more conceptual representation of the sounds, we know that we have this subconscious rule, we know that this word is produced differently, subconsciously, not really consciously. And not only we know as adult speakers of the English language, but even we all children know this. We know this because we do studies with children when we ask them to use noble words. For example, we show them two different shapes or two different dolls, and we give them nouns names. And then talk with the child until the child produces this word, nouns were to it there. And we know the children produce it there correctly with this noun. Names and then talk with the child until the child produces this word no one's word with that and we know the children produce that correctly with this known words depending on whether the word starts with consonant or vowels. Even three or all know that you produce that differently depending on the context. In syntax of course we know that that cannot be just anywhere in a sentence that can only appear in what we call a noun phrase. At the very least it needs to be followed by a noun. Sometimes we can also put an adjective in that but at the very least there must be a noun, right? We can just say the verb and not followed by something. It must be of the book or the table or the teacher, something like this. It's a part of the class that we call determiners and it can be substituted by another determinant. I can say the book or I can say my book or I can say this book so another determinant can take the same place. We know a lot about it from this syntactic perspective as well. How about philosophy? Philosophy in linguistics and overlap a lot when they study meanings. Semantics is a field where boss linguists and philosophers work a lot and from philosophical linguistics semantic perspective there is a semantically right? It doesn't mean anything in itself. It doesn't have what we call semantic context or symbolic meaning, nothing of the kind. It actually derives its meaning from the context and again depending on what we're using it with. For example because it's a definite determinant when we say something like the book, we immediately assume that there is some concrete book that must fit the description, right? For example in a lab study if there is a. When we say something like the book, we immediately assume that there is some concrete book that must fit the description, right? For example, in a lab study, if there is a book on the table and there is only one book and I say the book, the participant will look at the book right away. Because they assume it must be this book, there is no other book. Or if it's more in floral knowledge. If I say something like the book I lost yesterday was found by my roommate, the person who here is in first that there was this one book which I lost yesterday and that was found by my roommate. There is a lot of research on how people infer meaning from the depends on these things. In psychology, there is a lot of studies on, for example, where people would look when they hear the word there, right? A lot of studies is eye-checkers, for example. And again, a lot of research suggests that people, when there is nothing silent in the environment, like this one book that sits on my table, people will infer meaning. Or they will be searching in their memories to think, okay, is there any book that would fit the description that she has given me right now? Psychologist study, a lot of these kind of effects as well with the word that. That the science was like that play very important role in programs like parsers. For example, researchers of artificial intelligence or those who work on language models and so on, they rely a lot on rules of language or which words can combine together. I already told you that that in English must be part of an out phrase, must be followed by an out at some point. A program like parser would. . I already told you that that in English must be part of an outphrase, must be followed by a noun at some point. A program like parser would recognize that if in a string of input there is a word there, there is a high likelihood that one of the following words is a noun. And it helps the parser with this program to help figure out the meaning of the strings based on the knowledge of what this words like that mean. And again, programs like NLP programs, natural language processing that try to create programs that process language similar to humans. They also try to incorporate this kind of knowledge into programs so that these programs can do infer inferences and mental searches just like humans do that I mentioned early. And finally, neuroscience, which is also an important part of cognitive science, we know that different words are processing different parts of the brain. For example, there is something that we call a functional word, functional words, they don't mean anything by themselves, but they single grammatical relationship between words. And they are processed in a specific area in the brain that is called Broca's area, several different areas that are language specific in the brain, Broca is one of them and it involved in processing of this functional words. If there is some kind of trauma or house issue like religion or stroke in this particular area, people can still be able to speak, but they will have trouble producing functional words. They have no trouble saying words like book for instance, but they will not be able to say words like that. This is a characteristic of what we call Broca. Have trouble producing functional words. They will have no trouble saying words like book, for instance, but they will not be able to say words like that. This is a characteristic of what we call progress of Asia. Hopefully, this very quick and very brief introduction to how language can be cited by all cognitive areas helps you understand that, even if you don't go into linguistics, learn in something about linguistics can help you if you can see in your with cognitive systems. And let's talk a little bit about the cognitive system. The word cognitive science, the term cognitive science is relatively new because of this field is relatively new. In fact, we know more or less when the term was even coined. It was coined in 1956. And the very first society, a cognitive study society that was dedicated to research of cognition was only founded in 1978. It's a very relatively new field, right? But of course, people were asking questions about the mind way earlier. Tony will be telling you a lot about philosophers throughout ages thinking about this big questions about the mind. And the same is of language. People were asking questions about language way before linguistics became an independent field of study. But let's talk a little bit about linguistics as a field of study. The term linguistics was only invented in the mid 19th century. 1847 is the first time we see this word used in print. But of course, linguistics existed before that. In fact, 19th century was very rich. It was probably the first big breakthrough in linguistics. The field became very big, very popular, but back then it was not called linguistics. Back then the field was. Was very rich. It was probably the first big breakthrough in linguistic the film became very big very popular but back then it was not called linguistics. Back then the film was called philology and philology still exists as an independent field but it's studies some question that are not necessarily linguistic and nature so things like style and composition. But back in the 19th century any linguistic research would be called philology so a lot of people who are called philology is back then, a linguist from our modern perspective. The word philology itself is relatively new was only invented in 1716 but of course research on philology linguistic language was prior to that. Before we move to all the times here is just a chart to show you that how frequently this words have been used you can see the cognitive science has not been used until something like 1908 and now there is an increase in the use of the term because the field is growing very fast. You can see that philology is still used pretty frequently but you can see there is this increase in the 19th century this is where a lot of subfields of linguistics started to emerge and attract new researchers and then you see when the total linguistics picked up and now linguistics at the term is just much much more often because it's just a very very big field. Let's talk a little bit about history and by the way do not worry you don't have to learn what happened when in the past they suggest a given overview of what happened in linguistics but research on language started a very long time ago and just looking at the evidence that we have, I'm not just assuming that people must have been interested in language. We have evidence from. Research on language started very long time ago and just looking at the evidence that we have, I'm not just assuming that people must have been interested in language. We have evidence from third century before current era that, for instance, is Mesopotamian people were compiling vocabularies of foreign languages, of evidence that people were going in foreign languages to beg them. The first study, like formal study, linguistics study of language, was conducted in the six century BCE by a great Sanskrit scholar, Painini. He describes something like 1, 000 morphological rules of Sanskrit and he introduced some terms that we're using to this day. For example, he was the first to discuss the difference between consonants and vowels. We already talked about consonants and vowels today and he was also the first who introduced the difference between nouns and verbs, so that those words behave differently from each other. Because of that, he is sometimes called the father of linguistics. China did a lot of research as well. For instance, the first century of, before current era, it was the period called worried stages, worried states. There were multiple little kingdoms that were fighting with each other for power, but each one of them, or many of them, had their own dialects of Mandarin, sometimes even different languages. They have different writing traditions. There was a lot of research on grammar of their languages and dialects. And a lot of this survives to this day. We know how much incredible research has been done at the time. In the Middle East, in the 8th century, Persian school is seep away, wrote the first grant of Arabic. It was especially impressive that he was not an Arabic speaker, he learned Arabic. In the Middle East, in the 8th century, Persians called Sipaway, wrote the first gram of Arabic. It was especially impressive that he was not an Arabic speaker. He learned Arabic played. He was a Persian speaker. In 10th century, the first gram of Hebrew was wrote, was written. And if you look closer to the Western culture, ancient Greeks obviously are discussing which a lot. We have evident the plot. I like to discuss semantic questions. Aristotle wrote a lot about the language and his critics. And then starting in the 8th century of our era, we see the first language school. The first school that taught people not just individually, but as groups that were teaching them foreign languages, specifically Greek, was established in Alexandria. And after that, we see evident that people started writing grammar, so Greek, grammar, so Latin, and so on and so forth. Just to save some time, I'll skip to the 19th century. I mentioned earlier that 19th century was a big explosion of linguistic research. That was specifically because of several discoveries. For example, one of them you must have heard was by William Jones. He was a British official in India. He knew some Greek and Latin. And he was learning a little bit of Sanskrit because he was in India. And he noticed some similarities between Sanskrit, Latin, and Greek. He started what we call the comparative method, comparing languages to see what is common. He started what we also call historical linguistics, how languages change over time. Another very important person who contributed to the historical linguistics was the older brother, Green. If you read Green's fairy tales, . Change over time. Another very important person who contributed to the historical linguistics was the older brother Grimm. If you read Grimm's fairy tales to brothers, the oldest one was an incredible incredible linguist, very talented man, contributed a lot to linguistics of German language specifically, but also to historical linguistics in general. And in fact, we still teach what we call Grimm's laws in historical linguistics as a very, very talented man. In 20th century, we see shifts to what we call structuralism, structuralism was a big source, a school of certain many different areas, specifically linguistics. It was the idea that a language is a structure system. And we can study the systems as systems of formal units just dedicated to that. We don't have to necessarily study, let's say, how language is connected to semantics. We can just study morphology or just study syntax. This is one, we see separation between some of these fields of linguistics. And we see also conceptual separation between Europe and North America in this regard. Europeans, scholars were working on language that have been very well described and in the Stuttling, Greek and Latin and German and English. There were asking more big questions about language and meaning and theoretical issues of grammar. In North America, linguists were more concerned with the fact that a lot of native languages of the United States and Canada were dying at the time. And there were more concerned with just describing them as much as they could before the language is disappeared. A lot of methods that we're using to this day. And there were more concerns with just describing them as much as they could before the language is disappeared. A lot of methods that we're using to this day on describing unknown languages and on language revitalization. And just the comments in the language so that it's possible to revitalize it later was first created in Canada and the United States. I'd be polite transpose because they wanted to preserve as much as possible of the language that have been disappearing at the time. And then in the 20th century I'm sure all of you heard the name known Chomsky if not because of his linguistic claims then because of his political claims. He of course was the most famous linguist at least in the mid 20th century wrote syntactic structures and popularized linguistics outside of linguistics field including cognitive science really broad linguistics to attention of other fields. And finally in 1960 what sometimes people say was the last major discovery in linguistics survey. William Stokie published at St. Sun language structure. Book it was a first grammatical analysis of American Sun language. He was the first to formally show that all levels of grammatical organization exist in Sun languages. And therefore as well as not the pentamime, it's surreal language. That's what this type of Sun English linguistics. To conclude this super brief introduction into linguistics of the field. This is the picture of linguistics department here at UPC. The department was established in 1969 by Robert Greg who was the first person to establish an experimental language land in Canada. Our department. 1969 by Robert Greg, who was the first person to establish an experimental language law in Canada. Our department is the first and one of the most important departments in Canada into an experimental research. But in addition to that from the very first day, so the department there was a huge emphasis on studying First Nations languages. We work a lot on language revitalization and documentation and we also work a lot on Western African languages. There is a lot of effort to document those languages as well because there also tend to be under research. This is a very quick introduction into linguistics. I intended to take a break here but we don't have too much time left. I just want to check if there are any questions. What are the difference between philologists and historical linguistics? In the nights and century it was basically the same field. There was no difference between historical linguistics and philology. These days philology tend to be more about style. It's more like a study of the style of the written language. Which writer uses which style which characteristics. It's also a lot of etymological research. The history of words and how words change meaning but all linguists also study that. It's one of the examples of twirling with six and philology overlap. But for instance things like rhetorics and stylistics and no longer part of linguistic that's still part of philology. Philology basically became more restricted in terms of what is studied and parts of what used to be philology is now part of linguistic. Like historical linguistics. Sorry. And parts of what used to be philology is now part of industry like historical industry. I can see the chat anymore for some reason. You can check if there are any other questions. Oh yeah. I see the chat now. I don't see any other questions. I'm Ukrainian. I'm not the Russian. Exante is the Ukrainian name. It's what in linguistics we call a social marker. My name is very specific to Ukraine. When you hear and I'm like this, she must be from Ukraine. Any other questions before I move to the second part? No? Let's move. Going back to the question of what is linguistics? As we already mentioned, it's a scientific style of language. But the question is what is language? And here I always get some resistance because the way people use the word language is not the same way as linguists use the word language. Let's talk a little bit about how linguists use this term. Language is often confused with communication. And language is a form of communication. Obviously we speak to communicate with each other, right? Or we sign to communicate with each other. But we can communicate with other ways as well, right? If someone asked me, did you like the movie? And I showed them this, right? You understand what I mean. But we can communicate it with other ways as well, right? I communicated to you that I liked it, even though I didn't use language, right? It's just a gesture. It's something that's called an emblem or conventional as gesture. It has an assigned meaning, at least in our culture, it has a specific meaning. But it's not about the language. I didn't say good, right? And I didn't sign good animatic and sandwich, right? I just showed you a gesture. Communication is not language. And language is just what one specific part of communication. And this is where a lot of tension comes from in terms of how people use the term language. What is language from language six perspective? When we ask this question, we aim to answer two questions. First of all, what are the features that all human languages share, whether it's ASL, Ukrainian, Mandarin, whatever? Certain features we just expect to be in any language if it is in their language. But also what are the features that only human languages share? Any other system of communication that is not linguistic will not have these features. And this is again a question that has been discussed a lot. Out ages, going all the way back to middle ages. In fact, some of these discussions were banned by the Academy of Sciences because it just became popular with not enough empirical support for each view. But this is something that people have been asking for a long time. What is the difference between linguistic communication and non-linguistic communication? Here are just some early theory that I think. Been asking for a long time. Here are just some early theory that I think a helpful to understand. Early models of communication in general would expect five features. You must have a sender and a source. You must have a message. You must have a dedicated channel through which you send your communication at a receiver and in effect. For example, famous Cherokee communication system with nodes, right? There must be a person who knows how to do this nodes and create a message with the nodes. There must be a receiver who can understand it, right? I send it to someone else and this person looks at this node system and then understand what they mean. And there must be in effect. Let's say in my asking like, can you send me something that person should understand and send me something? Right? Communication is not just for us to make noise with our mouse. We usually communicate it because we want to get some kind of effect of communication. What this language have been discussed a lot and have been proposed in all kinds of ways, right? And again, there isn't understanding that other species communicate. I always say, if you are alive, you communicate with someone. Even if you are bacteria, you communicate with other bacteria. You can use chemical signals for this, but there will be some communication. If you are leaving creature, but of course, not every system or communication is linguistic. Language is specific for human language, specifically, there was this influential proposal that we are still using in linguistic to this day by Charles Hookett, a very famous linguist of the first early. Specifically, there was this influential proposal that we're still using in Reguistic to this day by Charles Hookett, a very famous linguist of the first early, first half of the 20th century. He proposed what could hold language design features. He first proposed 16 that he extended it and you will have a short paper but he assigned to read specifically about the feature that he believed originally to be part of any human language. But what are they? Here are all of the 16 features that eventually he came up with. In black, we see features that we will see in any communication system. At the Decatur channel, even when dogs pee on a tree, on a tree, to mark that territories, it's a communication system. They send a signal to add a dog that this is my territory. Don't you dare come here, it's my territory. They have a dedicated channel, right? They're using that P and the smelling system, right, to be able to send and receive this signal. Something like this is not language-specific. Things like rapid phasing or transit oriented means that the signal disappears over time. Again, if a dog peeps or I say a word, right, it will disappear. Unless someone is there to record me saying something, my word will disappear after I'm talking. If the rain goes on the tree, that be the dog may also disappear. These are things that are common to all communication systems. And then in red here, you see feature that I believe to be unique to human beings. There are some interesting exceptions, but not all of them. Most of this feature. And then in red here you see feature that I believe to be unique to human beings. There are some interesting exceptions but not all of them. Most of these features are indeed unique to human beings and we expect any human language to have all of these features whether they're in red or in black. If it's a human language it must have all of these features. Just to give you some examples. People are usually upset to hear that animal communication is not considered willing with six. Not just linguistics so even biologists who work on animal communication agree with that and that's because animal communication for the most part is limited in its nature. First of all animal communication mostly is innate so you don't have to teach a cat how to meow. I just knows how to meow. The information that is communicated is limited again like with the example of dog pee. Usually it's for marking territory or to sign signal that I'm I want to meet right now. I'm meeting season of my life but it cannot you know communicate about what do you think the weather tomorrow is going to be. This kind of information is limited in what content it can send. The aperture of signals is usually also fixed so even with species that have like several different signals usually they can add to the signals. And communication is mostly but here and now right so later on we will mention bees bees can communicate about not here right they can we go dense can they can communicate about okay if you fly five miles to the west you will find a few full of flowers it's. Here right they can we go dance can they can communicate about okay if you fly five miles to the west you will find a few full of flowers it's an incredible ability to communicate about something that is not here but they cannot you know communicate things like you know three weeks ago if you went five miles to the west there was a field of flowers they can only communicate about things that happened right now so this communication is limited to here to to now sorry another feature that is believed to be unique to human languages only is what we call displacement and displacement can be in space time or reality so what do I mean by that when I say things like exam eight watch yesterday it's displacement in time I'm communicating something that is not now it was yesterday right if I say something like it is raining in Victoria right now it's displacement is in space like I can see right I'm not a bitness to this but I can talk about things that are not happening in the same place where I am and finally when we have displacement in reality when we say things like Paul might know how to dance chicks I don't know if you can I'm just speculating that he can right and in alternative reality he may be but maybe not in this one so this is an example of displacement in reality and again animal species even with more advanced communication systems do not have their ability to communicate about all these three types of displacement in another feature that is unique to languages all languages is the relative pattern in the relative pattern in is. In other day, a feature that is unique to languages, all languages, is the knowledge of patterning. The knowledge of patterning is the idea that in languages we have two types of units. We have units that are meaningful, like words or signs or sentences, and we have units that are meaningless that need to combine together to create these meaningful units. In spoken languages, it's consonants and vowels, right? Consulants and vowels don't have any meaning to them. But when we combine them together, they can be assigned meaning, right? Like cat means something in the English language, right? But by itself, doesn't mean, oh, it must be a small, furry animal, right? Could mean that time, and can be used in all kinds of different meaningful words. The reality of patterning is this idea that we have two levels of structure in languages. We have the level of meaningful units, and we have a level of meaningless units that need to combine to create meaningful units. And the same is true for sign languages. I mentioned earlier, sign languages have all the same levels of organization as spoken languages. They, for example, have the values of patterning. They don't have consonants and vowels, but instead they have other units that are meaningless by themselves. For example, this is the sign, some other, in American Sign Language. It's consistent of three basic units. First of all, there is hand shape. Then there is a place of articulation, and then there is movement. If I change any one of those, let's say, if I move it here, I will get a different sign. Here is father, right? And American Sign Language. Just like if I take the whole cat and I change one of the sounds, let's say, cook to. Get a different sign. Just like if I just take the world cat and I change one of the sounds, let's say, could to put, I get a different word, hat, right? This is an example of a duality of patterning in selling, which is, sorry, there is a question. Is there an exception to any language halogen here? And now it's an exception for communicating that is not here, but this cannot communicate, but not now. It's one exception that is a good exception in animal communication for ability not to talk about here, but they cannot communicate about what happened yesterday or what will happen today. And of course, they cannot communicate about wouldn't you like it if you always had fields full of flowers, right? Displacement and reality, because in reality, you don't always get fields full of flowers. This can communicate about what is not here, but they cannot communicate about not now and not even in the reality. And humans can make, we can use our language to communicate about this. Sorry, that was another question somewhere. I have trouble getting my chat. Can someone check the last question in the chat? Yeah, it says, sorry, could you please explain what do you mean by arbitrary meaning? Oh, we will get that. Did I skip it? Let me try the meaning is very easy. There is no reason why cat means cat in English. It's just a convention, right? I'll be try the meaning is very easy There is no reason why cat means cat in English. And we know this because in other languages Cat is used with different words right in Ukrainian it's cute And in other languages as the word right so the word in most languages Most words means something just by convention. This is the meaning that we call arbitrary meaning It just happens to mean what it means, right? Usually there are some historical reasons, but basically There is no connection. This is something that they call arbitrary. Most words in most languages will Mean something for for no reason Right table means table just because chair means chair just because just because English speakers agree The chair means chair and if whatever reason we change this meaning for something else it will become a new meaning So for example one good example of that is the word gay in the past used to mean Agreeful right now it means person with the different actual orientation rate So this is an example when they in English speaking community just accepted a different meaning of the word Obviously we can still mean use the word gay in the old meaning as well But when you hear the word gay the first meaning that comes to a mind is probably not cheerful, right? Words can change meanings and sometimes very drastically and it's because there is no connection between what they mean and how they sound This connection is arbitrary Okay, have another question Send the communication for animals is limited which means that wolf and meow Doesn't have any fixed meaning and on the act as a signal. Have another question send the communication for animals is limited which means that wolf and meow Doesn't have any fixed meaning and on the act as a signal is there any research that focuses on how the International pitch of the minimal sounds can be interpreted and also either any set filtering with the focus of this research on this so intonation in animals Not that I know of and that I don't know of any research that shows that animals are sensitive to intonation difference in each other obviously humans can change Can not do these differences, but only with pets. Animals that we of like changed So that we can communicate with them more like our pets dogs and cats humans can notice the differences in intonation if it's a wild animal It depends obviously when an animal is in distress right like when they're crying out and paid we can notice it But this is again something that is universal. It's not really linguistic and nature But the subfield and linguistic that looks at What is common between languages and animal communications is called language evolution? English do work on language evolution and they do work on animal communication, but they're not the only ones So there is a whole field in Itsology which is a behavior of animals and biology that also studies animal communication So when I go to animal if a language evolution conference, there are always a ton of Cobalages with their cool status Telling about this thing. If you're interested in that field language evolution is the field to look at How is animal communication started? There is a lot of approaches of how animal communication. Interested in that field language evolution is the field to look at. How is animal communication started? There is a lot of approaches of how animal communication is started. Obviously, scientists love doing things in the lab when you can control for all kinds of variables. But there is a lot of pressure this day is not to keep animals in captivity because for ethical reasons. A lot of research that have been done that's in the 20th century was done in captivity. But these days, there is more tendency to study animals in the world. And in this case, it's hard because you cannot create experiments. But it's more of a natural environment. And you can see how animals actually communicate when they're in their own environment with their own members of their species, how they interact when they just normal for them. These days it's much more if you want to study how I don't know. Pandas communicate, you will have to go to China and observe them in the field. But again, there is still a lot of research done, for example, in zoos, if animals are in captivity, for this kind of reasons. A lot of research is also like take advantage of the situation that they would go to zoo and observe animals there. In Braille, solely a form of communication. Braille is not a communication system. It's a notation system. Braille represents letters with dots, for blind people to read. But it's a representation of a spoken language, right? If it's an English speaker, Braille will be representing English letters. If it's a French speaker, Braille will be representing French letters. Braille is an annotation system rather than a community. A braille will be representing English letters. Braille is an annotation system, right? Rather than a communication system. It's used to represent a communication system. Is Anandapea an exception to the arbitrariness? Yes. Anandapea words like chick-tock that sounds like what they mean. But Anandapea in spoken languages at least is very limited in scope, right? Most words are not automatic peak. But it's true. Anandapea exists in almost all languages. And it is an example of that language doesn't have to be exclusively arbitrary. But we do expect a language to be largely arbitrary. Does it make sense? Let's proceed. How much time do we have? We have a few more minutes left. We talked about duality of patterning. Now let's talk about productivity or creativity. Something that I mentioned earlier is that animal communication systems tend to be limited in scope. They usually don't have very large lexicons. Let's put them this way of meaningful sounds or signals or whatever. But human languages are limitless, right? English already is estimated to have something like a million words. And we can always invent anyone. And every day, new words are created. And this is why we have all this fun content. Like words over the year that you may have heard of. There are always word creation going on in any language that is alive and is used for communication. And an example of this, here I have. There always worked creation going on in any language that is alive and is used for communication. And an example of this, here I have all of us live through pandemic just recently and I don't know if you guys remember I assume you do, but words were invented every day, every day we heard any word like COVID, COVID be it or anti-social nearly, because this was something that was effective affecting our life, right? We wanted to talk about it. And we were creating new words to describe new reality. Whenever we are in need of communication and we are at a loss for words, we don't have a word in our language, we will just invent a new one. And this is an incredible ability of human languages. We will always be able to create new words to represent new meaning if we care about this meaning and we want to communicate about it. Here is another example. Right now we are living through a recession, right economic state is not good, prices are going up every day, rents increase in tuition increase in rate, so we talk about it. And we invent new words like based on the word inflation, people are now talking about great inflation and shrink inflation and inflation and inflation and inflation. I'm sure you guys heard all of these things, but he also put some titles from newspapers so that you know it's not just a sign if we invented these words, people actually talking about these things. Again, we are living through a recession, it affects our lives, we don't like it, we want to talk about it, so we invent new words. This is an ability of any human language, we will always be able to invent new words to communicate about things that matter to us. With mathematics we consider the language and to this definition. Human language. We will always be able to in many words to communicate about things that matter to us. Would mathematics be considered a language under this definition? No. I know in mathematics they talk about language of mathematics but I will have a note about how people use the word language in other fields and why I am okay with that as long as everyone understands that we talk about different things. But mathematics for instance will violate abilities. For instance one of the properties of human languages. Let's look at the list again. Here we see number five in red cultural transmission. Cultural transmission or there are some other names for this as well. Basically the idea that children will learn language just from exposure. In fact if your parents never try to teach you language but they would talk in front of you you will learn to speak And there are cultures like this where children will not talk too directly and children still learn the language as long as they are exposed to this language. And I'm sure many of you had experiences where you don't let's say if your parents or grandparents speak a different language you may not feel like oh I can't really speak it but you understand it to some extent. Which shows that you did pick up it to some extent. If you were actually exposed to it under a girl basis. If it's a relative who you see once a year obviously you will not learn much. But if let's say your grandparents leaves with you and you hear your grandparents talk to their friends on the phone or something. You will understand at least something. But even without that like the language that you exposed to and especially with the language you are talked to you will learn without being instructed. Now think. You will understand at least something, but even without that, like the language that you expose to and especially with the language you are talked to, you will learn without being instructed. Now think about your mathematical education. Did you just learn mathematics from being exposed to it? No, you had to send to school and you had to detour these things explicitly and it took you a lot of effort, right? Mathematics and the language of mathematics is not a language and it also violates like other things here as well. But you know, I think cultural transmission is just the easiest example to give in the situation. Has anyone tried to make a non-arbitrial language writing system? Yes, and Paul, sorry, not Paul Tom, as a philosopher can tell you about this effort. But for instance, Leibniz, a great philosopher and mathematician of the past, tried to come up with non-arbitrial language. The philosophical language was where Leibniz, one-to-one and like all of this other things and it was a huge trailer and he never even finished it. And the way like he started like a following, like there have been a lot of other philosophers and language enthusiasts who tried to come up with something like this and always ends in failure. Languages tend to become less arbitrary over time also because when you don't meet a connection between the meaning and the form of the word of sign or whatever, it's easier to talk about things that don't exist. It's easier to talk about things that are abstract. For example, epistemology, right? Can you come up with a word that is animated pig? That means exactly what epistemology means, right? It's impossible. Epistemology, right? The fact that languages are mostly arbitrary is a blessing for us. It would allow us to talk about things that don't exist impossible to imagine and abstract what have you. This is why we can talk about anything, even if we don't really know what we're talking about, which is not always a good thing, but this is just one example. Let's return to where we should be. And also someone please stop me when we run out of time because I get a very involved position when I do, but I think I'm basically at the very end now. This is a very, very short discussion of what language is. And as I mentioned earlier, not all features of languages are unique to languages, right? Some features are shared across any communication systems. Things like some entities signals have meanings, right? It seems like displacement, like be the dance, right? Bees can communicate about something that is not here, rapid-phaging, right? Signals disappear after you produce them. But then we also have property that are unique to languages and only to languages. And this is what we use to distinguish between what is language and what is not language. Things like temporal displacement and productivity and the knowledge of patterning and learnability and things like that. To conclude, language is unique to humans. No other species, animal species has it. Far as we know, maybe other animal species will develop it later on. Evolutionism. Unique to humans. No other species, animal species has it, so far as we know, maybe animal species will develop it later on. Evolution is ongoing, right? And apes may become smarter than they are now and may develop a language of their own. But as of now, no matter how intrinsic and complex their communication systems are and they are very impressive. I'm a huge fan of animals, trust me. But their communication systems do not meet all the properties that human communication has. Linguistic communication has. But now that I mentioned, I will talk about the usage of the term language. Of course, as I mentioned right from the beginning, this is how linguists use the word language. When an English say it's a language, we mean that it means all the criteria of linguistic communication, of a linguistic system. But of course, non-linguists use the word language how our they place and it's fine. Again, you remember what they told you before? Linguists don't start study languages to tell you how you should be learned in language, or speak in language. You want to use language, however you want, you can. And this is why people talk about things like Buddha language and the language of flowers and language of mathematics. And it's fine. One big contention is people always insist that programming languages and computer sciences languages, they are not. Again, they do not meet the criteria of linguists for linguistic communication. But it's also fine, because even in computer sciences, programming languages are not defined as languages. In fact, I have here the definition from languages and how the word language is. Even in computer sciences, programming languages are not defined as languages. In fact, I have here the definition from languages, and the way it is taught even in computer sciences is programming languages, sanitation systems. In the teaching system, it's something you write down. Write you instructions for the machine of what to do and how to do it. And a lot of programming languages incorporate elements of existing languages, so for example, English, but it's basically to make it easier for the human user to use programming languages. But there is an understanding that just because it's called programming language doesn't mean C++ is the language just like English. It's just a term, the technical term. Just like the word cookie, right? When I talk about cookies, I mean cookies that I can eat. When computer scientists talk about cookies, they usually mean small packets of information that the website can send to the browser, right? But it doesn't mean that computer scientists doesn't understand that this cookie is not edible. Of course they do, it's just technical term. Just because in computer science, programming languages are called languages doesn't mean they're defined as languages. Then the annotation system, even according to the definition of computer science. My big sense of ideas all of this is language for a linguist is something very specific, and we have very clear criteria of meeting this specific definition. The way non-English you this term is different. And again, we are fine with that. As long as everyone understands that, when a program talks about the programming language, they're not talking about a human language. They're talking about an adhesion system that happens. I find that as long as everyone understands that when a program talks about the program in language, they're not talking about a human language. They're talking about an adhesion system that helps humans and machines interact with each other. OK, I think this is my last slide. Do we have any last-minded questions? And then see any? I'll just ask the one in Oxana that quickly. Just about, you talked about new language, new words being created, I was just wondering what we can learn about words that disappear from or like is it because they're not, the terms aren't being used or are they like, why do some words get supplanted by other words with the same thing, for instance? Excellent question. It depends on the specific word. Some words just become obsolete because we're no longer, let's say, use this tool that we use to have the, for example, close to a degree straight, but we don't talk about pouring this much. They still exist in the English language. People still recognize that it means, but no one is using it anymore. And I would say more than children probably don't even recognize this word. And sometimes the word just changes meaning. For instance, the word pretty used to mean something like silly in the past. And again, just like with the word gay, they are the meaning just to co-work. This is very, very common. This is something because semantic drift. Or often, a word that was created for something specific starts to get more general usage. Or often where a word that was created for something specific starts to get more general view, more general view search, right? And this is something called semantic collection. There are different processes through which words change their meaning or become obsolete, usually it's for all kinds of reasons. And yeah, like it depends on the individual cases, Thank you so much. And thanks for a great, great talk. Thank you. I get a couple more questions. I'll just quickly look at them. Just to confirm, you won't be examined on the history. No, no, no one is going to ask you in what year was the gram of the lighting language. Don't worry about the dates. Is selling which something that can be picked up naturally? Yes, children exposed to sign-in from birth, loan sign language just like the loan spoken languages. In fact, So the way children acquire languages goes in stages. Certain properties of languages are acquired before the properties. A position of sign language, research and acquisition of selling, which show that children acquire sign languages, whether they're deaf or here and doesn't matter. Any child can acquire any language if the child is exposed to this language. A position of sign languages goes through the same very stages at the exactly the same ages as acquisition of spoken languages. And there is actually a lot of interest in research now on what we call bimodal bellingals. It's here in children who are exposed to post spoken languages and selling languages. And they're quite in both of them just like children acquired to languages when they're bellingals in spoken languages. Selling widgets are quite exactly the same way as spoken languages, which again show that's. Like children acquired to languages when they're bilingual in spoken languages. Selling widgets are quite exactly the same way as spoken languages are which, again, show that selling widgets do have cultural transmission. They meet the criteria of cultural transmission. But for instance, programming languages are not. No baby will start learning how to program in C++ just by watching daddy programming. At least no six months old, right? And six months we can already see children bubbling in both spoken languages and selling so things like mathematics or programming languages or things like that need to be explicitly taught. But languages do not have to as long as the child can be exposed to this language and hear it regular or see it regular the child will acquire it and just to confirm whether it's okay. This is it. Thank you so much for having me. I apologize again for being late and yeah.