Now it's a huge wall for the cost of, I have slightly probably way too much material, so it doesn't blow up to it. One thing I'd like to say though, as the get-go is you should feel very comfortable interrupting me, raising her and asking to go back, whatever, it makes it more fun for me. Maybe it'll slow the cost down. Also, I'm a great act. I'm guessing I'm going to point on it, so we'll later then. If I start to go past that, I'm going to place this combination stock, and we can get a raise. Are there anything else that you guys want to do with the floor, and I'm going to go on a circle? The survey is up, so please go up the survey on your background, and you can risk them. There's now all of us, so I need to do a group, right? It's the most other thing. OK, so let's see if this PowerPoint will now get to go on. OK, so it's likeology. Therefore, three types of psychology is anyone right now, but yeah, I'm going to go past the floor. Are three types of psychology. If anyone wanted to have a guess, one of them are all three of them. I'm going to call, you're right, this kind of developmental of social. There's others one as well, You want to take out where there's higher men in psychology right now. I'm going to call that old one type of psychology, which is like the academic slash scientific psychology that I'm sure you all have some of you know and have experience. But there's two other types of psychology out there, yeah. Behavioral, yes and nervous, love that and what the academic, scientific, psychology, yeah. Yeah, professional psychology is another type of psychology where you apply the methods of things that you learn through the academic sciences and into the profession. And then there's a third type which isn't professional, it's not academic, but it's you encounter it a lot in magazines, on TV, on talk shows, blog, yeah. Popular psychology. It's like, here we go, model of them and it's like, oh, . Vlog. Yeah popular psychology. Yeah, or just just maybe even just it's people's opinions about how How the world is in a way the way we of So you guys nailed it. There's the popular psychology. There's academic. There's professional psychology As I said applies kind of what we've learned from psychology so first I just want to go back and give you a little historical Contacts picking up on the way that almost would have lost the key approach So the old this is really the popular Psychology the public psychology and it goes back probably since people were on earth You can say play don't you know how like he is about how the psyche Operated Roman position gala also ideas about how the brain and the body related to one another and these who are not after up their beliefs about how these things work what makes up the mind then we can fast track to the 1800s so a little more than a hundred years ago 40 years ago and There's a whole bunch of types of popular public psychology. 140 years ago, 150 years ago. And there's a whole bunch of types of popular public psychology out there. And you just, if you think about the old and olden days, can you think of kind of things like that light fit in? And I'll give you a sample of the same answers that has been one type of read and communicate with the dad. But other types of popular psychology, public psychology, that might have existed yet.